.\" Version: 0.1.0
.\"
.TH ocf_suse_SAPStartSrv 7 "9 Aug 2021" "" "OCF resource agents"
.\"
.SH NAME
SAPStartSrv \- Manages sapstartsv for a single SAP instance as an HA resource.
.PP
.\"
.SH SYNOPSYS
\fBSAPStartSrv\fP [ start | stop | status | monitor | meta\-data | validate\-all | usage ]
.\" TODO monitor?
.PP
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBSAPStartSrv\fP is a resource agent for managing the sapstartsrv process for
a single SAP instance as an HA resource.
.PP
One SAP instance is defined by having exactly one instance profile.
The instance profiles can usually be found in the directory
/sapmnt/$SID/profile/.
In an Enqueue Replication setup one (ABAP-) Central Services instance ((A)SCS)
and at least one Replicated Enqueue instance (ERS) are configured.
An Linux HA cluster can control these instances by using the SAPInstance
resource agent. That resource agent depends on the SAP sapstartsrv service for
starting, stopping, monitoring and probing the instances. The sapstartsrv needs
to read the respective instance profile.
By default one system-wide sapstartsrv is started at Linux boot time to provide
the needed service for all SAP instances.
.PP
For specific Enqueue Replication setups using instance specific sapstartsrv
processes might be desireable. So each SAP instance is managed on its own by a
pair of one SAPStartSrv and one SAPInstance resource agent. SAPStartSrv starts
sapstartsrv for one specific SAP instance. By intention it does not monitor the
service. SAPInstance then utilises that service for managing the SAP instance.
SAPInstance also is doing in-line recovery of failed sapstartsrv processes.
The instance's virtual service IP address is used for contacting the sapstartsrv
process. Thus that IP address resource (e.g. IPAddr2, aws-vpc-route53) needs to start before SAPStartSrv.
.PP
The described setup is benefitial particularly for public cloud and NFS-based
environments. Both NFS shares with instance directories can be mounted
statically on all nodes. The HA cluster does not need to control that
filesystems.
The /usr/sap/sapservices file is stored locally on each cluster node.
.PP
.RE
.\"
.SH SUPPORTED PARAMETERS
This resource agent supports the following parameters:
.PP
\fBInstanceName\fR
.RS 4
The full qualified SAP instance name. e.g. P01_DVEBMGS00_sapp01ci.
Usually this is the name of the SAP instance profile.
.br
Unique, required, string, no default.
.RE
.PP
.\"
\fBSTART_PROFILE\fR
.RS 4
The name of the SAP START profile. Specify this parameter, if you have changed
the name of the SAP START profile after the default SAP installation.
.br
Unique, optional, string, no default.
.RE
.PP
.\"
.SH SUPPORTED ACTIONS
This resource agent supports the following actions (operations):
.PP
\fBstart\fR
.RS 4
Starts the sapstartsrv resource.
.br
Suggested minimum timeout: 60\&.
.RE
.PP
\fBstop\fR
.RS 4
Stops the sapstartsrv resource.
.br
Suggested minimum timeout: 60\&.
.RE
.PP
\fBstatus\fR
.RS 4
Performs a minimal status check of the sapstartsrv resource.
.br
Suggested minimum timeout: 60\&.
.RE
.PP
\fBmonitor\fR
.RS 4
The SAPStartSrv resource must by intention not define a monitor operation.
This is, because the failing sapstartsrv must never force a SAPInstance restart.
That would happen because the two resources reside in one resource group.
.\" TODO op monitor on-fail="ignore"
.RE
.PP
\fBvalidate\-all\fR
.RS 4
Performs a validation of the resource configuration.
.br
Suggested minimum timeout: 5\&.
.RE
.PP
\fBmeta\-data\fR
.RS 4
Retrieves resource agent metadata (internal use only).
.br
Suggested minimum timeout: 5\&.
.RE
.PP
.\"
.SH RETURN CODES
The return codes are defined by the OCF cluster framework. Please refer to the OCF definition on the website mentioned below.
.RE
.PP
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
* Example configuration for SAP ASCS instance resource group in an ENSA2 setup.
.br
SAP system name is EVA, SAP service is ASCS, SAP instance number is 00, SAP virtual hostname is sapeva. An loadbalancer is used together with dedicated IP netmask configuration for specific public cloud environments. The SAPInstance has been given a fencing priority, a crm property priority-fencing-delay is needed to make this work. See SAPStartSrv_basic_cluster(7).
The also needed ERS instance group and location constraint is shown in another example.
.PP
.RS 4
primitive rsc_SAPStartSrv_EVA_ASCS00 SAPStartSrv \\
.br
 params InstanceName=EVA_ASCS00_sapeva
.PP
primitive rsc_SAPInstance_EVA_ASCS00 SAPInstance \\
.br
 op monitor interval=11 timeout=60 on-fail=restart \\
.br
 params InstanceName=EVA_ASCS00_sapeva \\
.br
 START_PROFILE=/sapmnt/EVA/profile/EVA_ASCS00_sapeva \\
.br
 AUTOMATIC_RECOVER=false \\
.br
 MINIMAL_PROBE=true \\
.br
 meta resource-stickiness=5000 \\
.br
 priority=100
.PP
primitive rsc_IPAddr2_EVA_ASCS00 IPaddr2 \\
.br
 params ip=192.168.178.188 cidr_netmask=32
.PP
primitive rsc_Loadbalancer_EVA_ASCS00 azure-lb \\
.br
 params port=85085
.PP
group grp_EVA_ASCS00 \\
.br
 rsc_Loadbalancer_EVA_ASCS00 \\
.br
 rsc_IPAddr2_EVA_ASCS00 \\
.\" TODO meta resource-stickiness=1
.br
 rsc_SAPStartSrv_EVA_ASCS00 \\
.br
 rsc_SAPInstance_EVA_ASCS00 \\
.br
 meta resource-stickiness=3000
.br
.RE
.PP
* Example configuration for SAP ERS instance resource group in an ENSA2 setup.
.br
SAP system name is EN2, SAP service is ERS, SAP instance number is 10, SAP virtual hostname is sapeva. An IP address is configured as usual for on-premise use.
If possible, the ERS instance should run on a different node than the ASCS.
The also needed ASCS instance group is shown in another example.
.PP
primitive rsc_SAPStartSrv_EN2_ERS10 ocf:suse:SAPStartSrv \\
.br
 params InstanceName=EN2_ERS10_sapen2er
.PP
primitive rsc_SAPInstance_EN2_ERS10 SAPInstance \\
.br
 op monitor interval=11s timeout=60s \\
.br
 params InstanceName=EN2_ERS10_sapen2er \\
.br
 START_PROFILE=/sapmnt/EN2/profile/EN2_ERS10_sapen2er \\
.br
 AUTOMATIC_RECOVER=false IS_ERS=true MINIMAL_PROBE=true
.PP
primitive rsc_IPAddr2_EN2_ERS10 IPaddr2 \\
.br
 params ip=192.168.178.187
.PP
group grp_EN2_ERS10 \\
.br
 rsc_IPAddr2_EN2_ERS10 \\
.br
 rsc_SAPStartSrv_EN2_ERS10 \\
.br
 rsc_SAPInstance_EN2_ERS10
.PP
colocation col_EN2_ASCS00_separate \\
.br
 -5000: grp_EN2_ERS10 grp_EN2_ASCS00
.PP
order ord_EN2_ASCS00_first \\
.br
 Optional: rsc_SAPInstance_EN2_ASCS00:start \\
.br
 rsc_SAPInstance_EN2_ERS10:stop \\
.br
 symmetrical=false
.br
.RE
.PP
* Search for log entries of SAPStartSrv, show errors only:
.PP
.RS 4
# grep "SAPStartSrv.*RA.*rc=[1-7,9]" /var/log/messages
.\" TODO output
.RE
.PP
* Show failcount for resource rsc_SAPStartSrv_EN2_ERS10 . If the failcount
exceeds the migration-threshold, the resource will be moved to another node.
See SAPStartSrv_basic_cluster(7).
.PP
.RS 4
# cibadmin -Ql | grep rsc_SAPStartSrv_EN2_ERS10.*fail-count
.RE
.PP
* Manually trigger a SAPStartSrv probe action for instance ADA_ASCS00_engine.
Output goes to the usual logfiles.
.PP
.RS 4
# OCF_ROOT=/usr/lib/ocf/ \\
.br
OCF_RESKEY_InstanceName=ADA_ASCS00_engine \\
.br
OCF_RESKEY_CRM_meta_interval=0 \\
.br
/usr/lib/ocf/resource.d/suse/SAPStartSrv monitor
.RE
.PP
.\" TODO example for checking enqueue table?
.\" TODO example for checking process list?
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
/usr/lib/ocf/resource.d/suse/SAPStartSrv
the resource agent
.TP
/usr/lib/ocf/resource.d/heartbeat/SAPInstance
the also needed SAP instance resource agent, package resource-agents
.TP
/usr/sap/$SID/$InstanceName/exe/
default path for the sapstartsrv executable
.TP
/usr/sap/$SID/SYS/profile/
default path for DIR_PROFILE
.TP
/usr/sap/sapservices
SAP profiles definition file
.TP
/etc/sap_suse_cluster_connector
sap_suse_cluster_connector configuration, SLE-HA 12
.\"
.PP
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.PP
* At least SAP instances NW7.40 for ENSA1.
At least NW7.52 or SAP S/4HANA ABAP Platform 1909 for ENSA2.
.PP
* SAPInstance resource agent with MINIMAL_PROBE support, November 2020.
.PP
* Needed NFS shares (e.g. /sapmnt/$SID/, /usr/sap/$SID/) mounted statically or by automounter.
.PP
.\" TODO discuss read-write vs. /var/.../sapservices.moved
* Directory /usr/sap/ locally read-write mounted on each cluster node.
.PP
* Complete entries in /usr/sap/sapservices file.
.PP
* SAP instance profile Autostart feature is disabled for ASCS and ERS.
.PP
* SAP instance profile entry Restart_Program_xx is replaced by Start_Program_xx for ERS. 
.PP
* The sapinit boot script does not read entries from sapservices file at boot. Thus services sapping and sappong to handle sapservices file at system boot.
.PP
* The sapinit script is not used while the HA cluster is running on any node.
.PP
* SAP instance numbers controlled by the cluster must be unique.
.PP
* It is not allowed to block resources from being controlled manually. Thus BLOCK_RESOURCES in /etc/sap_suse_cluster_connector is not allowed anymore.
.PP
./"
.SH BUGS
.\" In case of any problem, please use your favourite SAP support process to
.\" open a request for the component BC-OP-LNX-SUSE.
The trace_ra resourcre tracing feature is not implemented so far.
.br
Please report feedback and suggestions to feedback@suse.com.
.PP
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBocf_heartbeat_SAPInstance\fP(7) , \fBocf_heartbeat_IPaddr2\fP(7) ,
\fBSAPStartSrv_basic_cluster\fP(7) ,
.\" TODO aws-vpc-route53 gcp-vpc-move-route
.\" TODO SAPStartSrv-showAttr(8) ?
\fBsapservices-move\fP(8) , \fBsap_suse_cluster_connector\fP(8) ,
\fBcrm\fP(8) , \fBnfs\fP(5) , \fBmount\fP(8) , \fBha_related_suse_tids\fP(7) ,
.br
https://documentation.suse.com/sbp/all/?context=sles-sap ,
.br
https://www.suse.com/support/kb/doc/?id=000019944 ,
.br
https://www.suse.com/support/kb/doc/?id=7023714 ,
.br
http://clusterlabs.org/doc/en-US/Pacemaker/1.1/html/Pacemaker_Explained/s-ocf-return-codes.html ,
.br
https://help.sap.com/doc/e9a0eddf6eb14a82bcbe3be3c9a58c7e/1610%20001/en-US/frameset.htm?frameset.htm ,
.br
https://help.sap.com/viewer/fe1db4ed6c5510148f66fbccd85f175f/7.02.22/en-US/47e023f3bf423c83e10000000a42189c.html
.br
https://wiki.scn.sap.com/wiki/display/SI/Troubleshooting+for+Enqueue+Failover+in+ASCS+with+ERS
.\" .br
.\" https://blogs.sap.com/2018/04/03/high-availability-with-standalone-enqueue-server-2/ ,
.\" .br
.\" https://blogs.sap.com/2020/08/27/evolution-of-ensa2-and-erp2.../ ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2711036 ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2630416 ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2501860 ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2464065 ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2254173 ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2077934 ,
.br
https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/953653
.PP
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
X.Arbulu, F.Herschel, L.Pinne
.PP
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) 2020-2021 SUSE LLC
.br
The resource agent SAPStartSrv comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
.br
For details see the GNU General Public License at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.\"
