.\" Version: 0.9.5
.\"
.TH sapping/sappong 7 "15 Aug 2025" "" "SAPStartSrv"
.\"
.SH NAME
.\"
sapping \- service for hiding sapservices file from sapinit service at system boot.
.br
sappong \- service for unhiding sapservices file at system boot.
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\"
\fBsapping\fP is a systemd service for hiding sapservices file from sapinit service at system boot.
.br
\fBsappong\fP is a systemd service for unhiding sapservices file after sapinit service has been started at system boot.
.br
The services are intended to be called at boot time. Administrative use during regular operations is not intended.
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
.\"
.TP
* enabling both services at boot time
# systemctl enable sapping sappong
.TP
* showing status of service sapping, including content of moved sapservices file
# systemctl status sapping
.PP
.\"
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 Successful program execution.
.br
>0 Usage, syntax or execution errors.
.\"
.SH FILES
.\"
.TP
/usr/lib/systemd/system/sapping.service , /usr/lib/systemd/system/sapping.service
systemd service definitions
.TP
/usr/sbin/sapservices-move
systemd service executable 
.TP
/usr/sap/sapservices
SAP profiles definition file, used by sapstartsrv et al.
.\"
.SH BUGS
.\"
In case of any problem, please use your favourite SAP support process to open a
request for the component BC-OP-LNX-SUSE.
Please report any other feedback to feedback@suse.com.
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.\"
\fBocf_heartbeat_SAPStartSrv\fP(7) , \fBsapservices-move\fR(8) ,
\fBsystemctl\fP(1)
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
.\"
F.Herschel, L.Pinne
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
.\"
(c) 2020-2025 SUSE LLC
.br
sapping/sappong comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
.br
For details see the GNU General Public License at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.\"
