.\" Version: 2020-11-26 18_00
.\"
.TH sapping/sappong 8 "26 11 2020" "" "sapstartsrv-resource-agents"
.\"
.SH NAME
sapping \- hiding sapservices file from sapinit service at system boot.
.br
sappong \- restoring sapservices file at system boot.
.PP
.\"
.SH SYNOPSYS
\fBsapping\fP
.br
\fBsappong\fP
.PP
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsapping\fP is a systemd service for hiding sapservices file from sapinit service at system boot.
.br
\fBsappong\fP is a systemd service for restoring sapservices file after sapinit service has been started at system boot.
.br
The scripts are intended to be called at boot time. Administrative use during regular operations is not intended.
.\" TODO
.PP
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
* enabling both services at boot time
# systemctl enable sapping
.br
# systemctl enable sappong
.TP
* showing status of service sapping, including content of moved sapservices file
# systemctl status sapping
.PP
.\"
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 Successful program execution.
.br
>0 Usage, syntax or execution errors.
.PP
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
/usr/sbin/sapping , /usr/sbin/sappong
systemd service executables 
.TP
/usr/lib/systemd/system/sapping.service , /usr/lib/systemd/system/sapping.service
systemd service definitions
.TP
/usr/sap/sapservices
SAP profiles definition file, used by sapstartsrv et al.
.PP
.\"
.SH BUGS
Please report feedback and suggestions to feedback@suse.com.
.PP
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBocf_heartbeat_SAPStartSrv\fP(7) , \fBsystemctl\fP(1)
.PP
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
X.Arbulu, F.Herschel, L.Pinne
.PP
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
.br
(c) 2020 SUSE LLC
.br
sapping/sappong comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
.br
For details see the GNU General Public License at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.\"
