.\" Version: 0.9.5
.\"
.TH SAPStartSrv_basic_cluster 7 "12 Jun 2026" "" "SAPStartSrv"
.\"
.SH NAME
.\"
SAPStartSrv_basic_cluster \- basic settings to make SAPStartSrv work
.PP
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\"
The SAP Enqueue Standalone 2 (ENSA2) scenario needs a certain basic cluster
configuration. Besides this necessary settings, some additional configurations
might match specific needs.
.\" TODO Specifics ENSA1 vs. ENSA2?
.PP
\fB* Operating System Basics\fR
.PP
\fBsystemd services\fR
.PP
The services sapinit, sapping and sappong are needed for this cluster.
.PP
For SystemV style saphostagent and sapstartsrv, the sapinit script needs to be
enabled.
For systemd style saphostagent and sapstartsrv, the service saphostagent needs
to be enabled and running, instance services SAP${SID}_${INO} need to be disabled.
See also REQUIREMENTS in man page ocf_suse_SAPStartSrv(7).
.PP
\fBtcp_retries2 = 9\fR
.PP
The OS network parameter tcp_retries2 influences the timeout of an alive TCP
connection, when retransmissions remain unacknowledged. The SAP application
servers (PAS/AAS) and central services (ASCS/ERS) are relying on TCP timeouts
for detecting lost connections. On the other hand SAP session timeouts and
enqueue replication timeouts are defined on application level. Tuning
tcp_retries2 helps SAP sessions and enqueue replication surviving cluster
actions.
.br
A value of 9 (for HZ=250) should let Linux TCP connections timeout fast enough
for default SAP application server and central services configuration.
.\" TODO NFS mount options for smooth takeover of sap instances, e.g. soft?
.PP
\fBUsers and groups\fR
.PP
Technical users and groups, such as <sid>adm are defined locally in the Linux
system. Further user <sid>adm needs to be in  group haclient.
See man page passwd(5) and usermod(8.
.PP
\fBHostnames\fR
.PP
Name resolution of the cluster nodes and the virtual IP address must be done
locally on all cluster nodes. See man page hosts(5).
.PP
\fBTime synchronization\fR
.PP
Strict time synchronization between the cluster nodes is mandatory, e.g. per NTP.
See man page chrony.conf(5).
.PP
\fBNFS mounted filesystems\fR
.PP
The shared filesystems /sapmnt/$SID/ and /usr/sap/$SID/ can be statically mounted
on all cluster nodes. See man page fstab(5) and example below.
.PP
\fB* CRM Basics\fR
.PP
\fBstonith-enabled = true\fR
.PP
The cib bootstrap option stonith-enabled is crucial for any reliable pacemaker
cluster.
.br
The value 'true' is one pre-requisite for having a cluster supported.  
.PP
\fBresource-stickiness = 1\fR
.PP
The crm rsc_default resource-stickiness defines the 'stickiness'
score a resource gets on the node where it is currently running. This prevents
the cluster from moving resources around whithout an urgent need during a
cluster transition. The correct value depends on number of resources, colocation
rules and resource groups. Particularly additional resources colocated to the
ASCS resource can affect cluster decisions. 
Too high value might prevent not only unwanted but also useful actions.
.\" TODO A value of '1' ...
.PP
\fBmigration-threshold = 3\fR
.PP
The crm rsc_default parameter migration-threshold defines how many errors on a
resource can be detected before this resource will be moved to another node.
See also \fBfailure-timeout\fR .
.\" TODO = 1 needed for resource monitor option on-fail=restart ?
.PP
\fBrecord-pending = true\fR
.PP
The crm op_default record-pending defines, whether the intention of an action
upon the resource is recorded in the Cluster Information Base (CIB).
Setting this parameter to \'true\' allows the user to see pending actions like
\'starting\' and \'stopping\' in crm_mon. Also the sap_suse_cluster_connector
interface uses this information.
.PP
\fBfailure-timeout = 86400\fR
.PP
The crm op_default failure-timeout defines how long failed actions will
be kept in the CIB. After that time the failure record will be deleted.
Time unit is seconds. 
See also \fBmigration-threshold\fR.
.br
The value '86400' means failure records will be cleaned automatically after
one day.
.PP
\fBpriority-fencing-delay = 30\fP
.PP
The optional crm property priority-fencing-delay specified delay for the
fencings that are targeting the lost nodes with the highest total resource
priority in case we do not have the majority of the nodes in our cluster
partition, so that the more significant nodes potentially win any fencing
match, which is especially meaningful under split-brain of 2-node cluster.
A promoted resource instance takes the base priority + 1 on calculation if
the base priority is not 0. Any delay that are introduced by pcmk_delay_max
configured for the corresponding fencing resources will be added to this
delay. A meta attribute priority=100 or alike for the ASCS resource is needed
to make this work. See ocf_suse_SAPStartSrv(7).
.PP
The delay should be significantly greater than, or safely twice,
pcmk_delay_max.
.PP
.\"
\fB* Pacemaker basics
.PP
\fBPCMK_fail_fast = yes\fR
.PP
The parameter PCMK_fail_fast in /etc/sysconfig/pacemaker specifies how pacemaker
reacts on failures of its subdaemons. Default "no" means to restart failed
subdaemons, while "yes" means fencing the node. Setting "yes" might help to avoid
undefined situations.
.br
Optional, default no.
.PP
\fBpacemaker service dependency to SAP instance service\fR
.PP
\fB[Unit]\fR
.br
\fBWants=SAP${SID}_${INO}.service\fR
.br
\fBAfter=SAP${SID}_${INO}.service\fR
.PP
In case systemd-style init is used for the SAP instances, it might be desired
to have the SAP instance service stopping after pacemaker at system shutdown.
Therefor a drop-in file for the pacemaker service might help. See examples below.
.PP
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
.\" TODO OS network tcp_retries2=8 (8..10)
.\"
\fB* crm basic configuration ENSA2\fR
.\" TODO scenario specific CIB basic settings
.\" TODO check against setup guides NW and S/4. Specifics ENSA1 vs. ENSA2?
.PP
Below are examples of crm basic configuration for ENSA2 clusters on SLE 15.
Shown are specific parameters which are needed. Some general parameters are
left out.
.br
This example has been taken from an ENSA2 three-node cluster SLE-HA 15 GA
with diskless SBD:
.PP
.RS 4
property cib-bootstrap-options: \\
.br
 expected-quorum-votes=3 \\
.br
 no-quorum-policy=suicide \\
.br
 dc-deadtime=20 \\
.br
 have-watchdog=true \\
.br
 cluster-infrastructure=corosync \\
.br
 cluster-name=hacluster \\
.br
 stonith-enabled=true \\
.br
 stonith-watchdog-timeout=31 \\
.br
 placement-strategy=balanced \\
.PP
rsc_defaults rsc-options: \\
.br
 resource-stickiness=1 \\
.br
 migration-threshold=3 \\
.br
 failure-timeout=86400
.PP
op_defaults op-options: \\
.br
 timeout=600 \\
.br
 record-pending=true 
.RE
.PP
This example has been taken from an ENSA2 two-node cluster SLE-HA 15 GA
with disk-based SBD. An optional priority fecing is configured and the SBD
pcmk_delay_max has been reduced:
.PP
.RS 4
primitive rsc_stonith_sbd stonith:external/sbd \\
.br
 params pcmk_delay_max=15
.PP
property cib-bootstrap-options: \\
.br
 dc-deadtime=20 \\
.br
 cluster-infrastructure=corosync \\
.br
 cluster-name=hacluster \\
.br
 stonith-enabled=true \\
.br
 stonith-timeout=150 \\
.br
 placement-strategy=balanced \\
.br
 priority-fencing-delay=30
.PP
rsc_defaults rsc-options: \\
.br
 resource-stickiness=1 \\
.br
 migration-threshold=3 \\
.br
 failure-timeout=86400
.PP
op_defaults op-options: \\
.br
 timeout=600 \\
.br
 record-pending=true 
.RE
.PP
\fB* crm basic configuration ENSA1\fR
.PP
Below is an examples of crm basic configuration for an ENSA1 two-node cluster on
SLE 15. Shown are specific parameters which are needed. Some general parameters
are left out.
.PP
rsc_defaults rsc-options: \\
.br
 resource-stickiness=1 \\
.br
 migration-threshold=3 \\
.br
 priority=1
.br
op_defaults op-options: \\
.br
 timeout=600 \\
.br
 record-pending=true
.PP
\fB* crm simple SBD stonith configuration on SLE 16\fR
.PP
The SBD STONITH/fencing mechanism on SLE-HA 16 uses fence_sbd instead of
external/sbd. See manual page fence_sbd(8) for details. 
Example for a basic disk-based SBD resource on SLE 16:
.PP
.RS 4
primitive rsc_stonith_sbd stonith:fence_sbd \\
.br
 params pcmk-delay-max=15
.RE
.PP
\fB* NFS shares for SAP instance filesystems\fR
.PP
Below is an fstab example for filesystems needed by the ASCS/ERS pair.
The filesystems are statically mounted on all nodes of the cluster for SAP
system EN2. The SAP instance name is used consequently to prepare for optional
multi-SID setups. The parent directory /usr/sap/ resides on each node locally.
The file sapservices must not be shared between nodes.
The correct mount options are depending on the NFS server.
.PP
.RS 1
.\" TODO check NFS options
nfs1:/s/EN2/sapmnt /sapmnt/EN2 nfs rw,hard,intr,nolock,actimeo=1,proto=tcp 0 0
.br
nfs1:/s/EN2/usrsap /usr/sap/EN2 nfs rw,hard,intr,nolock,actimeo=1,proto=tcp 0 0
.\".br
.\"nfs1:/s/EN2/saptrans /usr/sap/trans nfs rw,hard,intr,nolock,proto=tcp 0 0
.RE
.PP
\fB* ping resource for checking connectivity\fR
.PP
.\" TODO discuss what ping-based score might break ENSA scoring
Below is an example of an optional ping resource for checking connectivity to
the outer world. If the nodes have only one network interface, shared between
HA cluster and application, this measure does not improve availability.
.br
ASCS should run on an node from which more ping targets can be reached than
from others. If all nodes are same, ASCS stays where it is.
Three vital infrastructure servers outside the datacenter are choosen as ping
targets. If at least two targets are reachable, the current node is preferred
for running the ASCS. The maximum time for detecting connectivity changes is
ca.180 seconds.
.PP
.RS 4
primitive rsc_ping ocf:pacemaker:ping \\
.br
 op monitor interval=120 timeout=60 start-delay=10 on-fail=ignore \\
.br
 params name=ping_ok host_list="proxy1 proxy2 proxy3"
.PP
clone cln_ping rsc_ping
.PP
location ASCS00_connected grp_EN2_ASCS00 \\
.br
 rule 90000: ping_ok gt 1
.RE
.PP
\fB* systemd services for the SAP instance\fR
.PP
In case systemd style init is used for the SAP instance:
saphostagent needs to be enabled and running, instance services need
to be disabled. Example SID is HA1, instance number is 10.
.PP
.RS 4
# systemctl list-unit-files | grep -i sap
.br
# systemctl status SAPHA1_10.service
.br
# systemd-cgls -u SAP.slice
.br
# systemd-cgls -u SAPHA1_10.service
.RE
.PP
\fB* check saphostagent and show SAP instances\fR
.PP
Basic check for the saphostagent.
.PP
.RS 4
# /usr/sap/hostctrl/exe/saphostctrl -function Ping
.br
# /usr/sap/hostctrl/exe/saphostctrl -function ListInstances
.RE
.PP
\fB* SAP instance profile\fR
.PP
Check the instance profile for HA specific settings.
Example SID is EN2, instance number is 10.
.PP
.RS 4
# su - en2adm
.br
~> sapcontrol -nr 10 -function GetStartProfile |\\
.br
grep -e art_Program_ -e Autostart -e halib
.br
~> exit
.RE
.PP
\fB* sidadm group membership\fR
.PP
Check if the sidadm user is member of the HA specific haclient group.
Example SID is EN2.
.PP
.RS 4
# groups en2adm
.RE
.PP
\fB* check running pacemakerd daemon for PCMK_ settings
.PP
No output means default, which is f.e. PCMK_fail_fast=no. See
/etc/sysconfig/pacemakerd for details.
.PP
.RS 4
# cat /proc/$(pgrep pacemakerd)/environ | tr '\\0' '\\n' | grep PCMK_
.RE
.PP
\fB* check what SBD_ settings pacemakerd knows from running sbd daemon
.PP
No output means default. See /etc/sysconfig/sbd for details.
.PP
.RS 4
# cat /proc/$(pgrep pacemakerd)/environ | tr '\\0' '\\n' | grep SBD_
.RE
.PP
\fB* check for pacemaker IPC timeouts
.PP
.RS 4
# grep "pacemaker-.*unresponsive.to.ipc" /var/log/messags
.RE
.PP
\fB* show pacemaker service drop-in file\fR
.PP
In case systemd-style init is used for the SAP instance, it might be desired
to have the  SAP instance service stopping after pacemaker at system shutdown.
A drop-in file might help. Example SID is S07, instance number is 00.
.PP
.RS 2
# cat /etc/systemd/system/pacemaker.service.d/00-pacemaker.conf
.br
[Unit]
.br 
Description=pacemaker needs SAP instance service 
.br
Documentation=man:SAPHanaSR_basic_cluster(7)
.br
Wants=SAPS07_00.service
.br
After=SAPS07_00.service
.RE
.PP
\fB* check for pacemaker dependency to SAP instance service\fR
.PP
Example SID is S07, instance number is 00.
.PP
.RS 2
# systemctl show pacemaker.service | grep SAPS07_00
.br
# systemd-delta | grep pacemaker
.br
# systemd-analyze dot | grep "pacemaker.*SAPS07_00"
.RE
.PP
.\"
.SH FILES
.\"
.TP
/etc/passwd
the local user database
.TP
/etc/groups
the local group database
.TP
/etc/hosts
the local hostname resolution database
.TP
/etc/chrony.conf
basic config for time synchronisation
.TP
/etc/sysctl.d/*.conf
OS kernel parameters, e.g. TCP tunables
.TP
/etc/fstab
filesystem table, for statically mounted NFS shares
.TP
/etc/systemd/system/SAP<SID>_<NR>.service
systemd unit file for SAP instance
.TP
/etc/systemd/system/pacemaker.service.d/00-pacemaker.conf
drop-in file (optional)
.\" TODO
.PP
.\"
.SH BUGS
.\"
In case of any problem, please use your favourite SAP support process to open a
request for the component BC-OP-LNX-SUSE.
.\" TODO Please report feedback and suggestions to feedback@suse.com.
.PP
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.\"
\fBocf_suse_SAPStartSrv\fP(7) , \fBsap_suse_cluster_connector\fP(8) ,
\fBocf_pacemaker_ping\fP(7) , \fBocf_heartbeat_ethmonitor\fP(7) ,
\fBattrd_updater\fP(8) , \fBfence_sbd\fP(8) , \fBsbd\fP(8) , \fBstonith_sbd\fP(8) ,
\fBcrm\fP(8) , \fBcorosync.conf\fP(5) , \fBvotequorum\fP(5) , \fBhosts\fP(5) ,
\fBfstab\fP(5) , \fBpasswd\fP(5) , \fBgroups\fP(8) , \fBusermod\fP(8) ,
\fBchrony.conf\fP(5) , \fBsystemctl\fP(1) ,
\fBsystemd-cgls\fP(1) , \fBsystemd-analyze\fP(1) , \fBsystemd-delta\fP(1) ,
\fBha_related_suse_tids\fP(7) , \fBha_related_sap_notes\fP(7) ,
.br
https://documentation.suse.com/sbp/all/?context=sles-sap ,
.br
https://documentation.suse.com/sles-sap/ ,
.br
https://www.suse.com/support/kb/ ,
.br
https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/networking/ip-sysctl.txt
.\" TODO https://pracucci.com/linux-tcp-rto-min-max-and-tcp-retries2.html
.\" TODO RFC 1122
.PP
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
.\"
F.Herschel, L.Pinne
.PP
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
.\"
(c) 2020-2026 SUSE LLC
.br
SAPStartSrv comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
.br
For details see the GNU General Public License at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.\"
